URL: http://www.helmets.org/astmdocs/min0211.htm



                      <h>Bicycle Helmet Safety Institute
     _________________________________________________________________

                       <h>ASTM F8.53 Helmet SubCommittee

                <h>Unofficial and for members' convenience only
     _________________________________________________________________
     _________________________________________________________________

          <h>Minutes from ASTM F8.53 meeting: Miami, November, 2002.

    <h>ASTM Sub-Committee F-08.53 Headgear & Helmets
    <h>DRAFT MINUTES OF MEETING
    <h>November 8, 2002 - Miami, FL

   <p>The subcommittee meeting was called to order by Randy Swart at 8:42
   AM. Dave Halstead (Chairman) was called away early and could not
   preside over this meeting. There were 22 members and 7 visitors in
   attendance. Attendance list was passed around.

   <h>Officers

   <l>Chairman: Dave Halstead
   <l>1st Vice Chairman: Randy Swart
   <l>2nd Vice Chairman: Dennis Piper
   <l>Secretary: Isabel Wright

   <h>Members

   <l>Jason Brand
   <l>Nelson Kraemer
   <l>George Nagobads
   <l>Fred Sulzbach
   <l>Roy Burek
   <l>Dean Fisher
   <l>Thom Parks
   <l>David Thom
   <l>Len Clement
   <l>Mark Granger
   <l>David Rudd
   <l>Chris Withnall
   <l>Eric Darnell
   <l>Joseph Lunny
   <l>John Sabelli
   <l>Steven Keller
   <l>Peter McGinnis
   <l>David Spenciner

   <h>Visitors

   <l>Jean Francois Laperriere
   <l>Dennis Lieu
   <l>Michael Swain
   <l>Matthew Pfeffer
   <l>Trish Bare-Grounds
   vHeiko Schlarb
   <l>Vijaya Kuruganti

   <h>ASTM Staff: Jim Olshefsky

   <p>Note: Minutes to committee/subcommittee meetings will no longer be
   mailed out. They will be available at the ASTM Website and the BHSI
   Website.

   <p>Announcements: ASTM is making virtual meeting technology available to
   members. An Internet connection is required. A sub group of the
   subcommittees could meet via Internet to make presentations or make
   progress on task group work in between regular meetings. Call Jim
   Olshefsky (Staff Manager) to get more info on how to set up a virtual
   meeting.

   <p>1) Introductions were made of those in attendance.

   <p>2) Changes in agenda - Pole Vaulting & Martial Arts were moved up in
   the agenda.

   <p>3) F-1446-00 Base Standard -

   <p>a) Headform specification: - David Spenciner - We currently reference
   a draft international standard (ISO 6220) that has been discontinued
   in our helmet tests. Intention is to take the information from this
   document and put it in ASTM format than we would have our own headform
   standard. The document was balloted and there were 3 comments and 1
   negative.

   <p>Negative: Dave Thom - Frankfort plane vs. Basic plane. No evidence
   that the Basic plane corresponds to Frankfort plane. EN960 is
   referenced in this document but Frankfort plane is not mentioned in
   EN960. If there is a reference that ties these two planes together,
   then it should be listed in the headform draft. If not, then the term
   "Frankfort plane" should be taken out. It was determined that this
   wording can be removed as an editorial change.

   <p>Motion: Made by Dean Fisher: Term was found to be editorial and the
   term Frankfort plane will be removed.

   <h>Vote:
   <p>Yes --- Passed unanimously
   <p>No ---
   <p>Abstain ---

   <h>Additional comments:

   <p>1) Comment from Dave Thom - Product marking discussion - Product
   marking vs. just "marking"

   <p>2) Comment from Jason Brand & Dave Thom - 4 typos in document. 2 pages
   of text and 5 pages of tables. The numbers (typos) in the tables will
   be changed to reflect what is currently in the ISO draft standard.
   Dave Spenciner commented that in moving forward, there should be some
   review of these numbers at a later date. These would not be editorial
   changes.

   <p>3) Comment from Jacques Tholin deals with the possibility of the
   headform rotating on impact. Energy used in rotation is not captured
   by linear accelerometer. This was discussed yesterday at shirtsleeves
   meeting. Will wait for Jacques Tholin to come to next meeting for
   further explanation and discussion.

   <p>4) Comment from Guillaume Bélanger - (Section 4) Suggests that all
   headform sizes should be included from A-Q as per EN960 instead of
   only the 5 sizes (A, E, J, M & O). After extended discussion it was
   concluded that this topic along with the shape geometry will be
   discussed as part of the next revision, since this document has passed
   main committee.

   <p>5) Comment from Guillaume Bélanger - Delete the word "helmet" from the
   headform standard. (editorial change).

   <p>6) Comment from Celia Peterson - Cross reference to ANSI headform C
   which is a part of ASTM F355 (playground equipment) (similar to DOT
   standard). - There is another reference that they can use, original
   ANSI standard or DOT standard.

   <p>Congratulations were given to Dave Spenciner for completing this
   standard. Dave will get with ASTM editorial staff regarding small
   changes. The document then moves on to publication. Dave will then
   start work on possible revisions to the published document based on
   comments provided at this last ballot.

   <p>b) Comprehensive Clean-up - Dan Pomerening - Dan was absent from this
   meeting due to family reasons - Dan continues to look at this
   subcommittee's various standards to make them more uniform in format.

   <p>c) Labeling - Jason Brand - Jason had put together a spreadsheet of
   all labeling from each of the standards of this subcommittee plus two
   from Ice Hockey subcommittee. Some revisions were made after the
   Pittsburgh meeting and copies were sent to the labeling task group.
   More assistance is needed. The plan is to specifically look at F1446,
   revise, look for commonalties and then suggest labeling for " use only
   for ..." and multiple standards. After F1446, will go through
   remaining standards and revise as needed. Keep in mind label
   requirements for CPSC and CSA.

   <h>Labeling Task Group
   <p>Task group: Jason Brand,John Sabelli,Guillaume Bélanger, Mark Granger,
   Thom Parks

   <p>Note: If anyone would like to be on the e-mail list of the labeling
   task group, please contact Jason Brand (jason@teamwendy.com)

   <p>d) Dynamic Strap Test (F1446) - Roy Burek - Ballot item - Purpose of
   suggested change dealt with instructing technicians on how to adjust
   the harness when testing to remove variability. 1 negative and 2
   comments. Negative - Dave Spenciner - The proposed change was not
   clear. Needs clarification to add an extra step. Wording changes -
   should be appropriate "referenced" headform. An additional wording
   change regarding "impact headform". Will confirm with ASTM to make
   sure these changes are editorial. The changes will be made and the
   negative was withdrawn.Comments - Additional comments were discussed
   from Dennis Piper, Jason Brand and Jeff Skein.

   <p>Additional activity (F1446) - Dave Spenciner has offered to help with
   the P&B task force. We have some data from CPSC's round robin several
   years ago that may work without further testing for the Precision and
   Bias statement

   <p>4) F697-00 Practice for care and use of Athletic Mouth Protectors

   <p>No activity. Dr. Hank Cross was not at the meeting. Nothing pending.

   <p>5) F910-86 Baseball / softball face protector - Larry Maddux not here
   - No activity

   <p>6) Martial Arts Helmet - Dr. Dennis Lieu - The task group met
   yesterday with approx. 12 people at the meeting. The draft
   specification was covered in detail. Copies are available from Dr.
   Lieu. Progress has been good, and there has been good cooperation. The
   draft martial arts specification came from already existing ASTM test
   methods and some of the work from Dr. Lieu's laboratory. The draft
   currently calls for 2 types of tests.
   <l>a) Falling test, standard ASTM test, low & high energy levels
       <l>b) Impact test , swinging arm which simulates types of impact in
       martial arts. low & high energy.

   <p>This is not a one time use head gear. Needs to survive multiple
   impacts over an extended period of time. A Hybrid III head was
   proposed. The impact tester for the swing arm needs to be built. Low
   temperature test was eliminated. Test line - area of testing was
   expanded where impacts are expected. Eliminate max. mass
   specification. Headgear must protect the wearer and opponent
   (striker). Labeling will have to be reviewed. Discussed life span
   recommendation. It was noted that there is a European martial arts
   standard.

   <p>7) Pole Vaulting Helmets - Peter McGinnis - The task group met
   yesterday. Following are the minutes of the task group meeting. Note:
   Only an overview of these minutes was discussed at the full
   subcommittee meeting.
     _________________________________________________________________

   <h>F08.53 TASK GROUP ON POLE VAULT HEADGEARMeeting Minutes
   <h>November 7, 2002 - 8-10 am
   <h>Fontainebleau Hilton - Miami Beach, FL

   <p>Present: Spencer Chang, Tim Curley, Edward Dare, Eric Darnell, Cynthia
   Doyle, Bill Farrell, Dean Fisher (co-chair), Mark Granger, David
   Halstead, Jan Johnson, G. Peter Macon, Mark Massmann, Peter McGinnis
   (co-chair), Dennis Piper, Eddie Seese, Wilson Soohoo, Randy Swart,
   David Thom

   <p>1. Discussion: Is a pole vault headgear standard needed?
     * <l>4 state high school associations require helmet use by high school
       pole vaulters but do not specify type of helmet to use: Minnesota,
       North Dakota, South Dakota, and Wisconsin
     * <l>New York State legislature has proposed a law requiring all
       college and high school pole vaulters to wear helmets
     * <l>implementation of rules requiring larger pole vault pits and
       padding of hard surfaces eliminates much of the head injury risks
       - but many head injuries in pole vaulting have occurred in non-
       compliant facilities (i.e., unpadded hard surfaces around the pit
       or unpadded standard bases)
     * <l>expectations of helmet users will exceed capabilities of helmets -
       clear warning labels explaining the limitations of a helmet and
       the instructions for helmet use would need to be included as part
       of a standard
     * <l>helmets should not be considered the only solution to the problem
       of reducing head injuries in pole vaulting, but one part of an
       overall plan to reduce injuries in pole vaulting
     * <l>some concern about hyperflexion injuries to vaulter's neck when
       vaulter lands on pole vault pad while wearing headgear

   <h>Motion by Halstead, second by Seese:
   <p>To create a pole vault headgear standard to be considered by governing
   bodies as part of an overall plan to reduce pole vault injuries.
   <p>Motion passed: 19 in favor, 0 opposed

   <p>2. Discussion: elements of pole vault headgear standard
     * <l>single or multiple impact?
     * <l>which impact anvils will be included in testing - flat,
       cylindrical, curbstone, hazard?
     * <l>extent of helmet coverage?
     * <l>shape?
     * <l>drop height?

   <p>Dean Fisher has begun developing a pole vault headgear standard which
   combines elements of F1446, F1447, and F1492.

   <h>Motion by Halstead, second by Seese:
   <p>The task group recommends that the F08.53 Subcommittee on Headgear and
   Helmets approves the following statement: While the committee is
   working to establish an appropriate headgear standard for use in pole
   vaulting the committee recommends that governing bodies, consumers,
   and others desiring to use helmets immediately use helmets that meet
   one of the following standards: ASTM 1492, Snell N-94, or NOCSAE
   lacrosse helmet without face guard.

   <h<Discussion:
     * <l>availability of helmets meeting the Snell N-94 or ASTM 1492
       standards?
     * <l>why not include CPSC bicycle helmet standard? (inadequate
       coverage)
     * <l>what are the performance characteristics of the NOCSAE approved
       lacrosse helmets?

   <h>Motion amended to read as follows:
   <p>The task group recommends that the F08.53 Subcommittee on Headgear and
   Helmets approves the following statement: While the committee is
   working to establish an appropriate headgear standard for use in pole
   vaulting the committee recommends that governing bodies, consumers,
   and others desiring to use helmets immediately use helmets that meet
   one of the following standards: ASTM 1492 or NOCSAE lacrosse helmet
   without face guard.

   <p>Motion passed: 12 in favor, 1 opposed, 5 abstentions (see note below
   for the final version of the statement as approved by F08.53
   Subcommittee on Headgear and Helmets)

   <p>TASKS: Dean Fisher has begun and will continue development of a pole
   vault headgear standard which combines elements of F1446, F1447, and
   F1492.

   <p>Meeting adjourned at 9:50 am.

   <p>Respectfully submitted: Peter M. McGinnis, Ph.D. (Co-chair)
     _________________________________________________________________

   <p>On Friday, November 8, 2002, the F08.53 Subcommittee on Headgear and
   Helmets met and passed the following by a vote of 8 in favor and 0
   opposed, with 8 abstentions:While the committee is working to
   establish an appropriate headgear standard for use in pole vaulting
   the committee recommends that governing bodies, consumers, and others
   desiring to use helmets immediately use helmets that meet one of the
   following standards: ASTM 1492 or NOCSAE lacrosse helmet without face
   guard or visor.

   <p>Motion was made by Peter McGinnis and seconded by Dave Thom.

   <h>Vote
   <p>Yes 8
   <p>No 0
   <p>Abstain 8

   <p>8) F2040 Recreational Snow Sports - Sid Roslund - Short discussion
   regarding editorial issues of plus/minus symbol on the ballot item.
   This document is ready to go to main committee ballot.

   <p>9) Roller hockey - Guillaume Bélanger - This is a new standard and was
   put out for ballot. 4 negatives were received along with a series of
   comments.

   <p>a) John Sabelli - section 4.5 re: ear coverage. The drawing will be
   fixed to address this persuasive negative. Discussion on section 4.4
   (1st sentence)

   <p>b) Randy Swart - Impact is currently on 4 specific points on or above
   test line in the document. Discussion on controlled and uncontrolled.
   There was a vote on the negative - should allow testing on any
   location on or above the test line and not restricting it to specific
   sites. Negative was found to be persuasive.

   <h>Vote
   <p>Yes 11
   <p>No 0
   <p>Abstain 7

   <p>c) David Spenciner - Discussion on rationale on UV testing and
   relevance of the test proposed. There was a consensus to remove
   artificial aging test from the draft.

   <p>d) Labeling - Not intended for Ice Hockey - Leave labeling as is.

   <p>e) Garnet Alexander - Section 4.5 and 5.1 temperature too high (50°C)
   for helmet conditioning. A task group was formed to look into this.

   <h>Heat aging helmets Task Group
   <h>Task group Jason Brand Guillaume Bélanger

   <p>Guillaume will continue with the development of this standard and
   re-ballot.

   <p>10) Soccer Headgear - Dennis Piper - The letter from the US Soccer
   Federation (lead team physician) regarding the draft soccer helmet
   standard was read to the subcommittee. Dennis Piper chaired the task
   group meeting. About 25 people attended. The helmet would protect
   against incidental impacts in soccer, primarily from goalposts, the
   ground and other players, not specifically heading. The draft went out
   for ballot and received many negatives. These were discussed in the
   task group meeting. One negative was regarding the retention system in
   the draft required a hard shell. There was a vote that there should
   not be a hard shell-dependent retention system in the standard.

   <h>Vote
   <p>Yes 14
   <p>No 0
   <p>Abstain 6

   <p>11) F1447-99a Bicycle - (now combined with F1751) - Les Earnest -
   There was 1 comment (affirmative w/ comment) from Jacques Tholin -
   Paragraph 13: label Interior / permanent label Labeling task group
   will discuss the word "permanent".

   <p>12) F1751-00 - Recreational Roller Skating - Les Earnest - see above
   (F1447)

   <p>13) F1898-01 Infant toddler Non-Motorized Wheeled Vehicle - No
   activity. Nothing pending

   <p>14) F1952-00 Downhill Bicycle Racing - No activity. Nothing pending

   <p>15) F2032-00 BMX Bicycle - No activity. Nothing pending

   <p>16) F429-01 Football test methods - Republished last year. No report

   <p>17) F 717-95 Football helmets - Thad Ide No report

   <p>18) F1163-00 Equestrian- status - Roy Burek - This item went to
   ballot. There were 3 negatives. There was a problem with the format of
   the ballot and It was unclear from the ballot what exactly was being
   changed. After discussion and clarification, all 3 negatives were
   withdrawn. The balloted change goes on to main committee ballot.

   <h>Task group Roy Burek, John Sabelli

   <p>Additional equestrian activity - Dave Halstead has sent a letter to
   Senator Dodd who is head of a committee that is looking at a bill in
   the US Senate that would require the CPSC to adopt an equestrian
   helmet standard. This is similar to the legislation that required the
   CPSC to adopt a bicycle helmet standard. The legislation would list
   the adoption of the ASTM standard, and not one from the CPSC. The
   issue of updating the standard is also included in the letter. There
   has been no response since the letter was sent 9/6/02.

   <p>Branch task group - Roy is still looking for a letter that was in the
   equestrian press, regarding that ASTM had not considered branches &
   equestrian helmets. There are concerns in the UK regarding penetration
   injuries.

   <p>19) Rodeo Helmets - New standard - Status: - Task group will continue
   activity.

   <h>Task group Fred Sulzbach, Len Clement, Roy Burek

   <p>20) F1492-00 Skateboarding - No report

   <p>Notes: No manufacturers are making helmets certified to F1492.

   <p>21) F-1849-00 Short Track speed ice skating - No report, nothing
   pending

   <p>22) Whitewater sports helmet - Eric Darnell is the new task group
   chairman (point person) More data is needed regarding injuries.

   <h>Task group: Eric Darnell, Gill Turner, Dave Halstead

   <p>23) Mountaineering. - No active task group

   <p>24) Jaw Joint Protectors - New (Z6103Z) - Chris Withnall reported that
   there is activity in this area with Biokinetics and Wayne State
   University working together. There is a target date of DEC 2005 for a
   completion date.

   <h>Task group Chris Withnall

   <p>25) Other business

   <h>F-08 Administrative deadlines:

   <p>1st round subcommittee ballots Due 1DEC02
   <p>Minutes and Main ballot items Due 23JAN03
   <p>2nd round subcommittee ballots Due 7MAR03
   <p>Agendas (Kansas City) Due 4APR03

   <h>Review of subcommittee membership:
   <p>The subcommittee is in balance as regards to producers vs. all other
   categories.

   <p>Producers: Voters 26 - Non-Voters 30
   <p>Users: Voters 8 - NonVoters 1Consumer: Voters 0 - NonVoters 0General
   <p>Interest: Voters 57 - Nonvoters 11Unclassified Voters 1 - Non Voters
   <p>4Totals: Voters 92 - Non-voters 46

   <h>Future F-08 meeting dates are as follows:May 7-10 2003 Kansas City, MO
   <h>Westin Crown Center, Kansas City, MO
   <l>Nov. 19-22 2003 Tampa, FL Tampa Marriott Waterside, Tampa, FL
   <l>May 18-21 2004 Salt Lake City, UT Little America Hotel & Towers
   <l>Nov. 10-13 2004 Washington, D.C. Omni Shoreham, Washington D.C.
   <l>May 17-20 2005 Reno, NV Hilton Reno Resort, Reno, NV
   <l>Nov. 9-12 2005 Dallas, TX Hyatt Regency, Dallas, TX
   <l>May 16-19 2006 Toronto, Canada Sheraton Centre Toronto
   <l>Nov. 15-18 2006 Atlanta, GA Hyatt Regency, Atlanta

   <p>Next Meeting - May 7-10, 2003 - Kansas City, MO

   <p>The meeting was adjourned at 11:41 AM

   <p>Respectfully submitted,Isabel Wright (Secretary)
     _________________________________________________________________

   <p>Last modified: July 21, 2002


